# M2Status

Easy part of the job is holding the latest readings from everything local for 
transmission elsewhere. This part has update_x functions that update the thing, 
storing it against a timestamp, and then every second (or so) the thread can 
generate outgoing messages with the relevant data over the relevant links. 
Likewise the thread can process any incoming messages and route them on to the 
correct destination.

Specifically for routing..

M2FC: Packets generated locally are sent to the other M2FC over the xbee link. 
Packets received from the other M2FC are logged to SD card and sent over the 
serial link to M2R (in the Body case this happens but doesn't do anything). 
Packets received from M2R are logged to SD card and sent over the xbee link to 
M2FC Body for logging.

M2R: Packets received from M2FC are queued for radio transmission. Packets 
generated locally are also queued for radio transmission and are sent over the 
serial link to M2FC Nose for logging.

In both cases all the packets are used to update the local concept of state 
from which other systems (e.g. RockBLOCK messages, radio backup, etc) are able 
to generate appropriate messages.

Hard part is tracking this flight-readiness. Need to know if everything is 
ready to fly, getting ready to fly, or not ready to fly. Need to distinguish 
between no data and success too, e.g. between a thread not running at all (and 
thus not reporting errors) and also between a broken comms link (e.g. between 
two M2FCs) causing no errors to be reported.

For each item being tracked, start in STATE_ERR_NOT_STARTED. Items may then 
update themselves to the relevant state during operation.

Need to track items that should be talking to us in that case too, like M2FC 
Body for M2FC Nose and M2FC Nose for M2R.

# Layout

Struct which holds..

* Latest readings with timestamp for:
    * M2FC:
        * ADC readings for 3 SG and 3 TC
        * Accel readings for LG and HG
        * Baro readings
        * Gyro readings
        * Magno readings
        * State estimation altitude and velocity and acceleration
        * Mission control state
        * Pyro continuity and a "fired" flag that is only set, never cleared
    * M2R:
        * Battery voltage
        * GPS time, position, altitude, status
* Other statistics..
    * CPU usage
    * M2FC:
        * MicroSD duty cycle
    * More things here
* Status for...
    * M2FC:
        * ADC
            * started running
            * callback error
        * Accel:
            * started running
            * invalid device ID
            * LG selftest fail
            * HG seltest fail
            * LG callback while thread active
            * HG callback while thread active
        * Baro
            * started running
        * Gyro
            * started running
            * I2C error
            * init error
            * ID check error
            * read data error
            * callback while thread active
        * Magno
            * started running
            * I2C error
            * init error
            * ID check error
            * callback while thread active
        * SE
            * Could not map pressure to altitude
        * Mission control
            * Started running
        * Pyros
            * Continuity error
        * MicroSD card
            * Error connecting to SD card
            * Error mounting filesystem
            * Error opening file
            * Error writing data
            * Error reading data
        * Datalogging
            * Started running
            * Logging message failed to allocate pool space
            * Logging message failed to send mailbox message
        * Config
            * Started running
            * Wrote config
            * Invalid config
            * Error reading config
    * M2R:
        * RockBLOCK:
            * ?
        * Radio:
            * ?
        * GPS:
            * ?
    * System
        * Overall state: OK, warning, error?


Item States

STATE_OK
STATE_WAIT
STATE_ERR
STATE_ERR_NOT_STARTED
STATE_ERR_INITIALISING
STATE_ERR_READING
STATE_ERR_WRITING
STATE_ERR_SENDING
STATE_ERR_ALLOCATING
STATE_ERR_CALLBACK_WHILE_ACTIVE
STATE_ERR_SELFTEST_FAIL
STATE_ERR_INVALID_DEVICE_ID
STATE_ERR_PERIPHERAL
STATE_ERR_BAD_INPUT

Items to keep track of:

On M2FC:
    ADC
    Accel
    Baro
    Gyro
    Magno
    State Estimation
    Mission Control
    Pyros
    MicroSD
    Datalogging
    Config
    M2FCBODY
    M2FCNOSE
On M2R:
    RockBLOCK
    Radio
    GPS
    M2FCBODY
    M2FCNOSE
    M2R

Overall State is then STATE_OK, STATE_WAIT or STATE_ERR
